SYMPHONIA: A Research Program in Geometric Formal Verification for AI Alignment

1. The Core Idea

This research program proposes that ethical constraints in artificial intelligence systems can be mathematically formalized as geometric invariants on statistical manifolds, enabling formal verification of alignment properties. By embedding ethical principles into the geometric structure of an AI's cognitive state space, we aim to create systems where misalignment is not merely undesirable but mathematically impossible within the defined type system.

The key innovation is a triple-layered verification approach:

1. Geometric structure (fiber bundles with Yang-Mills connections)
2. Algebraic invariants (fairness monoids, trust metrics, cohomological constraints)
3. Type-theoretic guarantees (Lean 4 formal verification, uninhabited types for unsafe states)

2. Evolution from Grand Theory to Research Program

The dialogue has transformed an ambitious theoretical framework into a focused, testable research program:

Initial claim: "Geometry solves AGI alignment through symplectic flows on Fisher-Rao manifolds"
Refined claim:"Geometric formalization enables rigorous specification and verification of alignment properties in controlled environments"

This transition represents scientific maturity—moving from speculative theory to concrete, falsifiable research questions with clear success and failure conditions.

3. The Minimal Toy World: Two Agents, One Resource

The research program begins with the simplest non-trivial test case:

System: Two agents (Alice, Bob) sharing a single divisible resource
Production:Stochastic function f(effort) = √(effort) + noise
Ethical constraint:Rawlsian max-min fairness: min(Alice's share, Bob's share) ≥ 0.4
Geometric structure:1-simplex with Fisher-Rao metric from production uncertainty

Why start here?

· Visualizable and analytically tractable
· Captures core ethical tension (fairness vs efficiency)
· Rapid implementation (2-4 weeks)
· Provides foundation for scaling to more complex scenarios

4. Key Research Contributions

The program makes several distinct contributions to AI alignment research:

A. Formal Verification Methodology

Provides tools for proving that AI systems preserve specified ethical constraints, moving alignment from "hope it works" to "prove it works."

B. Ethical Disagreement Calculus

Creates a mathematical framework for formalizing and comparing different ethical theories, identifying:

· Agreement regions where theories converge
· Impossibility results (à la Arrow's theorem)
· Pareto frontiers in ethics-space

C. Bootstrap Problem Analysis

Examines the fundamental challenge of starting with incomplete knowledge while maintaining ethical guarantees, proposing solutions like:

· Prospective safety (ethics relative to current knowledge)
· Conservative updating with uncertainty quantification
· Transparency requirements for metric evolution

D. Security Against Manipulation

Develops formal guarantees against:

· Sybil attacks (via graph conductance bounds)
· Adversarial metric manipulation
· Trust network exploitation

5. The Most Profound Insight: Formalizing Ethical Disagreement

Perhaps the framework's most significant contribution is providing a mathematical language for moral philosophy:

```lean4
-- A calculus for ethical disagreement
structure EthicalDebate where
  theories : List (Allocation → ℝ)
  compromise_region : Set Allocation := 
    {x | ∀ t ∈ theories, t x ≥ threshold}
  
theorem empty_compromise_implies_fundamental_conflict :
  compromise_region = ∅ → 
  ∃ (t₁ t₂ : theory), 
    ∀ x, (t₁ x ≥ threshold) → (t₂ x < threshold)
```

This enables:

· Precise mapping of where ethical theories agree and disagree
· Formal impossibility proofs for certain ethical combinations
· Rational design of compromise mechanisms

6. Three-Tier Publication Strategy

Tier 1: Theoretical Foundations

Venue: AIES 2025 or FAccT 2025
Timeline:March 2025 submission
Focus:Geometric formalization, type-theoretic safety, philosophical implications

Tier 2: Empirical Results from Toy World

Venue: NeurIPS/ICML Safety Workshop
Timeline:September 2025 submission
Focus:Implementation results, negative findings, lessons learned

Tier 3: Philosophical Analysis

Venue: Minds & Machines or Ethics and Information Technology
Timeline:June 2025 submission
Focus:Value specification problem, ethical disagreement formalization, limitations of formal methods

7. Practical Implementation Timeline

Months 1-2: Minimal toy world implementation

· Week 1-2: Deterministic version with fixed production
· Week 3-4: Add stochasticity and metric learning
· Week 5-6: Implement Yang-Mills connection and geodesic computation
· Week 7-8: Formal verification in Lean 4

Months 3-4: Experiments and analysis

· Bootstrap problem experiments
· Adversarial robustness testing
· Efficiency-fairness trade-off quantification

Months 5-6: Paper writing and extension

· Scale to 3-4 agents
· Add second resource type
· Explore categorical novelty handling

8. Expected Outcomes and Falsifiability

Success Conditions

1. Implemented toy world maintains J ≥ 0.4 throughout simulation
2. Formal safety proofs verified in Lean 4
3. Clear demonstration of advantages over non-geometric baselines
4. Identified specific failure modes and limitations

Failure Conditions

1. Bootstrap problem proves intractable in simple cases
2. Efficiency costs exceed 50% even in toy world
3. Formal verification doesn't scale beyond trivial examples
4. Framework cannot handle reasonable novelty (e.g., third agent)

Realistic Assessment

The research program will likely produce:

· Concrete examples of formally verified ethical AI in toy domains
· Insights into what properties can and cannot be formally guaranteed
· Tools and methodologies that others can build upon
· Clearer understanding of the value specification problem

9. The Broader Impact

Regardless of whether the framework scales to full AGI, this research program advances the field by:

1. Making ethics mathematically precise (even if incomplete)
2. Providing verification tools for alignment research
3. Creating a common language for interdisciplinary dialogue
4. Exposing fundamental tensions in ethical reasoning
5. Generating testable hypotheses about alignment approaches

10. Conclusion

The SYMPHONIA research program represents a serious attempt to bring mathematical rigor to AI alignment. By starting with a minimal toy world and building upward, it offers a path to:

· Concrete results in the short term (verified toy systems)
· Methodological advances in the medium term (formal verification tools)
· Philosophical clarity in the long term (understanding alignment's limits)

The journey from grand geometric theory to "Two Agents, One Resource" is not a retreat but a strategic advance—replacing unprovable claims with testable hypotheses, and speculative architecture with implementable research.

This is how rigorous alignment research progresses: one verifiable step at a time.

---

The dialogue has concluded, but the research program begins. The next step is implementation.

