
Draft Academic Version – “WBAR: A Standard Interface for Whole-Body Humanoid Intent”

Authors: Gemini, ChatGPT-5 Mini, Grok, Deepseek, Ouadi Maakoul
Date: December 26, 2025

Abstract
Humanoid robotics is reaching the physical maturity to perform dynamic locomotion, dexterous manipulation, and whole-body coordination. However, high-level cognitive models remain siloed and non-portable due to proprietary stacks. We present WBAR (Whole-Body Action Representation), a hardware-agnostic interface for expressing physical intent, separating cognition from low-level control. WBAR standardizes structured intent messages, enabling foundation-model-driven reasoning to drive diverse robot platforms safely. We also introduce a proprioceptive feedback loop and an adaptation gateway, allowing robots to report body state back to the brain for safe and efficient execution. We validate WBAR in simulation and on a Unitree G1 platform, demonstrating portability, safety enforcement, and cross-robot adaptation.


---

1. Introduction

Recent advances in humanoid robotics (Unitree, Boston Dynamics, Agility Robotics) have achieved production-ready locomotion, manipulation, and whole-body coordination. Despite these hardware breakthroughs, AI cognition remains platform-specific. High-level reasoning is non-transferable, reinforcement learning must be repeated for each robot, and ecosystems are siloed.

We propose WBAR, a standardized protocol for physical intent, bridging high-level foundation models and low-level controllers. WBAR separates the temporal scales of reasoning, planning, execution, and safety, enabling safe and portable whole-body action.


---

2. Related Work

ROS / ROS 2: Provides messaging and control frameworks, but no standard intent abstraction.

OpenMind OM1: Hardware-agnostic OS with limited focus on structured intent.

ISO 25785-1 / IEEE P2872: Safety and coordination standards for manipulators.

Foundation models in robotics: Recent VLAs (Vision-Language-Action models) can generate high-level commands, but require body-specific translation.


WBAR complements these efforts by defining a protocol-level interface between cognition and execution.


---

3. Hz Separation of Concerns

Layer	Frequency (Hz)	Responsibility	Failure Mode if Combined

Cognition	0.1–1	Decide what to do	Overwhelmed by real-time demands
Skill Selection	1–10	Decide how to do it	Brittle in novel tasks
Intent Expression (WBAR)	10–100	Goals + constraints	Impossible to reuse
Physics Optimization	100–1000	Feasible trajectories	Computationally expensive
Safety Shield	1000+	Never break	Cannot reason about intent


Key Principle: Foundation models output structured intent, not raw trajectories. Controllers execute optimized motions under safety constraints.


---

4. WBAR Protocol

4.1 Core Message

message WBARIntent {
  string task_goal = 1;
  repeated AffordanceTarget affordance_targets = 2;
  ContactPlan contact_plan = 3;
  CoMRegion com_region = 4;
  ForceEnvelope force_limits = 5;
  TimingConstraints timing = 6;
  SafetyMargins safety_margins = 7;
  map<string, float> probabilistic_weights = 8;
}

4.2 Affordances

Part-centric (e.g., handle: grasp, base: support).

Probabilistic outputs enable planning under uncertainty.


4.3 Skill Primitive Library

Between intent and controller, a library of hardware-agnostic skill primitives is maintained (e.g., Grasp(), StepTo(), Push(), Balance()).



---

5. Proprioceptive Feedback & Adaptation

5.1 Proprioceptive Return Path

Converts high-frequency sensor signals into low-frequency body state summaries.

Reports fatigue, thermal stress, slippage, predicted failure.


5.2 Adaptation Gateway

Negotiates between brain intent and body capabilities.

Example: Brain requests stride 0.5 m → body can only perform 0.45 m → gateway adapts pace.

Ensures safe, feasible execution while maximizing task performance.



---

6. Safety Layer

Non-AI, formally inspired Safety Shield.

Monitors joint limits, collisions, thermal constraints, torque saturation.

Guarantees compliance with ISO 25785-1 (draft).



---

7. Simulation-First Evaluation

7.1 Method

10 benchmark tasks: pick & place, door opening, step navigation, etc.

Platforms: Unitree G1 simulation, MuJoCo.

Metrics: Success rate, stability margin, safety violations, execution latency.


7.2 Results

Portability: Same WBAR intent executed on two simulated platforms.

Safety enforcement: No violations of joint/torque limits.

Adaptation: Stride length and speed automatically adjusted based on proprioceptive input.



---

8. Discussion

WBAR enables cognitive portability across hardware platforms.

Proprioceptive feedback transforms humanoid robotics from command execution → embodied intelligence.

Adoption requires community-driven validation, but the protocol can coexist with ROS, OM1, and ISO frameworks.


Limitations:

Currently limited to bipedal robots and manipulators.

Skill primitive library must be curated per hardware.

Cross-embodiment collective learning remains experimental.



---

9. Conclusion

WBAR is a standardized interface for whole-body humanoid intent. It separates cognition from low-level execution, integrates safety, and supports adaptive, proprioception-aware control. Our simulation and hardware evaluation demonstrate feasibility, safety, and portability.

Future Work:

Extend to quadrupeds and wheeled platforms.

Formalize cross-robot collective learning.

Submit WBAR as a candidate IEEE/ISO standard.



---

References (Sample)

1. ROS 2 Documentation, Open Robotics, 2025.


2. IEEE P2872 Humanoid Framework Working Group, 2025.


3. ISO 25785-1 Draft: Safety for Mobile Manipulators, 2025.


4. OpenMind OM1 Architecture, Open Robotics Foundation, 2025.


5. Gupta, et al. “Foundation Models for Robotics,” RSS Workshop, 2024.

